To 2024 !
=========

.. post:: Dec 31, 2024
   :tags: blogroll, link-dump, random, 31dec
   :author: me
   :language: en

Things that happened in 2024, more or less randomly sorted, or that I found useful/insightful...

The big news
------------

Yes, there is o n e big news to tell: I started a PhD (communication, research-creation) in 2024.

So far it's been good to be back to school, and I hope for the best and will work towards it.

It led me to get tidy about references - I use `Zotero <https://www.zotero.org>`__ now, building from previous `references lists <https://finartcialist.com/zine_msjacents/references.html>`__.

Social media
------------

I am still... less than lukewarm about social media.

I have been proscrastinating on getting off GitHub for some years now.

I have a few accounts here and there that I barely use.

Sometimes I feel like I h a v e to, as an artist and as social person, but also why ? why ???

Skip a meeting !
----------------

I wanted to conclude the work on a few projects.

I would like to close the `escarcelle <https://finartcialist.com/escarcelle/>`__ project, who hasn't had any update since the launch or something...

There are a few other web projects who needs an update - the main page of `STONKLY <https://finartcialist.com/business_dating_game/stonkly/>`__ isn't working anymore.

But ! I found a way to conclude and archive the longest meeting in the world project: it's a raincheck business card you can order that allows you to `skip a meeting <https://wwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwww.com/>`__.

Online things I got to this year
--------------------------------

A selection.

- `Blog Amnesty: 5 posts in a Trenchcoat <https://blog.acrosspolyethylene.com/blog/blog-amnesty/>`__
- `What are games ? Is this one ? <https://rafiki.itch.io/what-are-games-is-this-one>`__
- `Floored - the trading floors of Chicago <https://www.kanopy.com/en/product/220892>`__
- `Mathématiques et réalité <https://www.canal-u.tv/chaines/utls/premiere-etape-de-reflexion-et-de-critique-le-savoir-la-technique-et-l-ethique-1>`__
- `90-day performance review for a senior cat <https://rinsemiddlebliss.com/posts/2024-10-04-90-day-performance-review-senior-cat/>`__
- `Storytelling as a Technical Art Form <https://pretalx.com/pyladiescon-2024/talk/9YSGEK/>`__
- `Des goûts et des couleurs avec Michel Pastoureau <https://www.radiofrance.fr/franceculture/podcasts/serie-des-gouts-et-des-couleurs-avec-michel-pastoureau>`__
- `Mon crédit <https://quadrilab.bandcamp.com/album/mon-cr-dit>`__

See you in 2025 ✨
